UER Organization, Management and Human Resources
Program: 3A
Course code –Course title : MG05-001-G – Human Resources Management
Final Exam - Monday May 2, 2022
Course coordinator : Juliette Evon
Semester 6 - Year 2021-2022
Instructions :
- No exit is allowed before 30 minutes.
- Any exit is final and the copy must be returned.
- No mobile phone or connected watch should be kept on yourself or near you during the
exam. Bags and cell phones that are turned off must be placed in front of the examination
room.
- No exchange of material is allowed during the exam (pen, eraser, chart of accounts, etc.).
Page 1
Part 2 : Case Study – 10 points
« Mymarinière.fr »
Founded in 2002 by Jean-Charles Plaimaut, the company Mymarinière.fr is located
in the Vendée region of France. The marinières sold exclusively on the Internet are
aimed at a clientele looking for quality clothing, but also at younger customers
thanks to the "vintage" fashion. Mr. Plaimaut's ambition is now to attack foreign
markets and especially emerging markets, which are very fond of highly
differentiated products.
To date, his sales team is not trained for export. The recruitment of an international
sales manager reporting directly to Mr. Plaimaut would allow the company to
prospect the main foreign Internet sales sites before going on site to conclude
partnerships and carry out communication actions. A good knowledge of the criteria
of consumption abroad, market studies, prospecting with the right interlocutors and
a flawless argumentation will increase the chances of success of this conquest of
new markets. Since we do not have the skills in-house, the research must be done
externally.
Finally, the company of 50 people does not have a human resources department
dedicated to recruitment. The management and the company's main operational
staff have always managed the various hirings themselves, via co-optation,
professional or personal networks, Pôle emploi or Apec for the more technical
positions. Moreover, there is no job description in the company. Mr. Plaimaut
therefore contacted Gilbert Toupaix, a consultant from Recrutinter, by e-mail in order
to define the issues involved in this recruitment.
Gilbert Toupaix, a Recrutinter consultant to whom Mr. Plaimaut has entrusted the
recruitment, must prepare his next appointment by setting up his recruitment
strategy. To do so, he entrusts you with certain tasks that are essential to the
recruitment process.
Question 1 (3 points):
Prepare a note based on the main stages of a recruitment process proposing
to Mr. Plaimaut the stages during which he will be able to intervene (you can
make a diagram).
Need Definition:
Step: job characteristics
Intervention : validation by Mr. Plaimaut of the position and profile
study carried out by Recrutinter
Step : Profile of the candidate
Intervention : validation by Mr. Plaimaut of the position and profile
study carried out by Recrutinter
Page 2
Candidate Search:
Step : choice of the pool/sourcing
Intervention : Recrutinter
Step : Job offer
Intervention : Recrutinter (eventual validation by Mr. Plaimaut)
Step : communication with the target
Intervention : Recrutinter
Implementation:
Step : logistic and material organization
Intervention : selection of files, first interviews, possible tests by
Recrutinter - interviews of the last 2 or 3 candidates with Mr. Plaimaut
Step : final decision
Intervention : M.Plaimaut
Step : integration
Intervention : M.Plaimaut
Question 2 (2 points):
One of your colleagues received a call from Mr. Plaimaut who wanted to add some
"verbal" details to the profile of the future international sales manager
I spoke to one of your clients, Mr. Plaimaut, while you were in a meeting. Here is
what he told me about your current file:
"Ideally, I would like someone with fluent English, and who speaks Chinese or
Arabic, but that would really be a plus. It would also be better if the person was
single. There will indeed be a sustained work rhythm that requires a flawless health
(smoker and overweight candidate abstain) and no family constraints too heavy,
because many trips are expected.
This will be our international contact, and this implies an excellent command of
negotiation techniques, autonomy and sufficient interpersonal skills to build lasting
relationships with international partners.
The image of the future manager must therefore be remarkable (no strange names
and especially not a trade unionist or someone with strong political or religious
convictions); we have no time to lose with this type of consideration and certain
emerging markets are sensitive. We have to have a smooth image. Well, you know
what I mean.
I didn't comment, I'll let you deal with Gilbert. Good luck."
Page 3
What are the discriminatory criteria in Mr. Plaimaut's comments? Is it less
discriminatory if he informally tells you about them over the phone?
• "a single person": family status
• "flawless health..." : health status
• "(candidate smoker)": morals
• "...and not overweight": physical appearance
• "no heavy family constraints" : family situation
• "no funny names" : patronymic
• "especially not a trade unionist" : trade union activities
• "or a person with political convictions" : political opinions
• "or religious beliefs": religious affiliation
The fact that this information was communicated informally by telephone has no
bearing on the discriminatory nature of the remarks. In matters of discrimination,
proof is free and all means are allowed.
A candidate who believes that he or she has been discriminated against in the
context of this recruitment process may use any means to provide proof of facts
suggesting discrimination: e-mails, letters, etc.
Question 3 (3 points):
Draw up the job offer corresponding to the characteristics finally retained,
indicating the mandatory criteria and inventing the other criteria not
communicated that are essential for the posting.
March 18, 2016
Position based in Sables-d'Olonne
Export Sales Manager
(CDI)
Mymarinière.fr is a textile company that manufactures and sells vintage sailors on
the Internet. It is experiencing significant development abroad thanks to its high-end
strategy.
Missions and tasks:
The main mission of the export manager will be the development of foreign markets
and particularly emerging markets. To do this, he/she will have to prospect the main
foreign Internet sales sites initially, then go on site to negotiate the referencing of
Mymarinière.fr products and think of communication actions with local partners.
Candidate profile:
Page 4
The candidate, with a bachelor to master level, must have several years of
experience in sales, having acquired a good knowledge of consumption criteria
outside France, market research and prospecting with the right contacts. His/her
role as the company's international contact person implies an excellent command
of English and negotiation techniques. He/she must be able to work independently,
while knowing how to build close and lasting relationships with international
partners.
Annual remuneration: 50-60 k€ (bonuses according to commercial
performance, profit-sharing and car).
Please send your application on the recruitment space of the Mymarinière.fr
website (CV + cover letter).
Question 4 (2 points):
Gilbert Toupaix has selected several candidates and is now preparing to conduct
the interview phases. Since Mr. Plaimaut wants to take part in the final recruitment
interviews, you are in charge of preparing a short "recruitment interview conduct kit"
for him.
Make a note of the good behaviors to adopt and the pitfalls to avoid during an
interview. What points will you emphasize to Mr. Plaimaut?
Prepare an interview guide:
The interview support is a "checklist" that summarizes all the points to be discussed
with sample questions. The objective is to collect all the information related to the
job description, the profile and the job offer (provide a copy of these documents for
the interview).
⇒ Support produced by Recrutinter and to be sent to Mr. Plaimaut
Preparing the "candidate file :
The candidate file includes the CV and the cover letter (provide photocopies so that
each person involved in the recruitment process can make their own annotations).
⇒ Files to be prepared by Recrutinter and sent to Mr. Plaimaut
Guarantee material conditions favorable to the exchange:
The material aspects must not be neglected:
provide a place that is safe from disturbances (e.g., a meeting room, not a group
office or a place where people pass through);
Allow enough time to avoid rushing the candidate or shortening the appointment.
Page 5
⇒ Logistics to be provided by Mymarinière.fr if the interviews take place on the
company's premises
Harmonization of data:
The interview outline must be respected and a summary grid filled out in order to be
able to compare the applications on the basis of harmonized information. The study
of correctly filled in application files will allow us not to let "hot" impressions take
over and lead to excessive subjectivity.
⇒ Tools to be prepared by Recrutinter and sent to Mr. Plaimaut
Summary grid of the application:
The company can provide a summary grid of the application in order to synthesize
the data, compare the opinions and archive the results (recontact a former
candidate, prove that there was no discrimination...).
The interview process :
The recruiter must be vigilant on several points during the interview:
Putting the candidate at ease: avoiding the appearance of defense mechanisms that
prevent the necessary information from being collected;
adopt an understanding attitude: it is preferable not to contradict, but to try to clarify
by asking questions, rephrasing or validating
Keep control of the interview without imposing your own rhythm: do not cut off the
candidate or leave "empty" silences that disturb him/her;
Do not try to destabilize the candidate to "test" his/her reactions: do not deliberately
ask "trick" questions or make derogatory comments, for example.
⇒ Remind Mr. Plaimaut of the criteria for discrimination, so that he does not ask
discriminatory questions in light of what he said when he called the Recrutinter
agency.

AIX-EN-PROVENCE - ANGERS - BORDEAUX - LYON - PARIS - STRASBOURG - BUDAPEST - SHANGHAI
ACADEMIC DEPARTMENT
ORGANIZATION, MANAGEMENT AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Program: PGE - 3A - Human Resources Management
Course code / course name: MG05-001-G - Human Resources Management
Final exam of December 21, 2022 – Estimated time : 1h15
Course coordinator: Ms. Juliette Evon
Semester 05 - Year 2022-2023
Instructions :
- No exit is allowed before 30 minutes.
- Any exit is final and the copy must be returned.
- No mobile phone or connected watch should be kept on yourself or near you during the
exam. Bags and cell phones that are turned off must be placed in front of the examination
room.
- No exchange of material is allowed during the exam (pen, eraser, chart of accounts, etc.).
- The scale indicated is for information only
1rst Part : Case Study (10 points)
2nd part : MCQ (10 points)
Page 2
PART 1
Tacquard case study (10 points)
Pierre Tacquard created the “Société Textile Tacquard” (STM) in 1877 in the Nord-Pas de
Calais region of France, specializing in the manufacture of children's clothing. The local
economy was indeed prosperous, supported by an abundant workforce, numerous investors
and a rich mining industry.
Pierre Tacquard quickly became a pioneer in the fight against child labor. His advertising
slogan, "Tacquard, for children who play", testifying to a strong ideological commitment,
became a symbol of pride for all the successive generations of the company's employees.
However, the history of “Société Textile Tacquard” is also marked by hardships. Like many
companies in the North of France, it suffered greatly from the economic crisis in the 1970s.
The textile industry was then hit hard by competition from imported products. The efforts of
successive managers will do nothing, the “Société Textile Tacquard” must lay off more than
half of its workforce in the 80s and part of the production is relocated. For the employees
who were lucky enough to stay, the trauma is real. For some, it was a failure, for others a
betrayal...
However, the financial difficulties are not resolved and it is necessary to constantly innovate
to maintain the company's image and remain a reference in the minds of consumers. So,
when Jerome Landier, a marketing trainee, submits the idea to the director, Mr. Emile, to
launch a range of ethical clothing for children. The latter saw an interesting opportunity for
Tacquard.
The skills needed for the Solidarity line project :
Mr. Emile warns you that he does not wish to hire an additional person for the position of
commercial assistant. Besides the financial aspect, he prefers to privilege the way of the
internal mobility because he can rarely grant promotions and the staff representatives often
reproach it to him. In order to make a job offer to interested employees, you start to draw up
a job description.
Appendix 1 - Extract from interviews with Jérôme Landier
(...)
Page 3
"How do you imagine the Solidarity range service?
I think that with two people, it should be enough to start up if we complement each other
well.
On my side, I already did an internship last year in a company that also sold products from
an ethical approach, organic more exactly. With my training, I think I am able to take care of
all the marketing and commercial part. On the other hand, I was in a food company and I
still don't know much about the textile world. Ideally, I would like to find someone who knows
about sewing, production techniques and the different qualities of textiles. Of course, we will
have to trust our suppliers, but it would be nice if my assistant could control the quality of
the raw materials and the sewing work.
But then again, maybe we shouldn't ask for too much, anyway, we'll be doing mostly
commercial work in this department. The bulk of the person's work will actually be to assist
me. It is therefore imperative that he or she knows basic Word and Excel software and has
a basic knowledge of English, as we will be doing a lot of work abroad. In short, she or he
has to be versatile, this is the kind of job where you have to be as comfortable doing basic
commercial correspondence as doing basic accounting such as invoicing or sales follow-up,
obviously for the actual accounting, it will be Tacquard's accountant who will do it. Even if I
don't expect a very high level of skills or a specific diploma, I need someone who wants to
do everything and who can manage when I'm away because I'll probably be moving around
a lot. People work a lot as a team in the company and that's great but I'm afraid that the
business of our department will set us apart a little bit so we'll have to take charge."
Questions:
1. Tell Mr. Emile the methodology for constructing a job description, i.e., what
are the main themes to be included in this description? (4 points)
The following methodology can be proposed to build the job description:
- Consultation of existing job descriptions for similar positions within the company or
via external references made available - 0.5 points;
- Development of a questionnaire to fill in the incomplete fields of the job description
- 0.5 points;
Page 4
- Interview (round trip) with the "resource" person, in this case Jérôme Landier - 0.5
points;
- Validation of the hierarchy, here Mr. Emile - 0.5 points.
The main themes to be transcribed on the job description are the following:
- Job title - 0.25 points;
- Positioning in the organization - 0.25 points;
- Tasks - 0.25 points;
- Missions - 0.25 points;
- Working conditions and location - 0.25 points;
- Skills - 0.25 points;
- Professional experience - 0.25 points;
- Training/education - 0.25 points.
2. Using the minutes of the interview with Jérôme Landier as a guide, draw up
the job description for the position of sales assistant. (4 points)
Job title: Sales Assistant Solidaridad (M/F) – 0.25 points;
Job identity – 0.25 points;
- Reporting to: Solidaridad department – 0.25 points;
- N+1: Head of department – 0.25 points;
- Status : Sales Assistant – 0,25 points.
Missions - 0,25 points;
The Solidaridad sales assistant will be responsible for assisting the department manager in
the launch and commercial management of the Solidaridad range – 0.5 points.
Page 5
Tasks – 0.25 points;
- Sales follow-up - 0.25 points;
- Basic accounting follow-up - 0.25 points;
- Quality control - 0.25 points.
Skills – 0.25 points;
- Knowledge - 0.25 points (if accompanied by examples as listed below)
o Sewing knowledge
o Word/excel
o English knowledge
- Know-how – 0.25 points (if accompanied by examples as listed below)
o Sewing and raw material quality control
o Writing of commercial letters
o Basic accounting
- Soft skills – 0.25 points (if accompanied by examples as listed below)
o Versatility
o Autonomy
3. Name 4 criteria related to elements of discrimination that cannot appear in
a job description. (2 points)
Students should to propose 4 criteria from those listed below, 0.5 points per correct
answer.
- Physical appearance
- Age
- Health status
Page 6
- Belonging or not belonging to a so-called race
- Belonging or not to a nation
- Sex
- Gender identity
- Sexual orientation
- Pregnancy
- Disability
- Origin
- Religion
- Bank account number
- Political opinions
- Philosophical opinions
- Family situation
- Genetic characteristics
- Morals
- Surname
- Union activities
- Place of residence
- Ethnicity or not
- Loss of autonomy
- Ability to speak a foreign language
- Vulnerability due to economic situation

Part 2: Case Study - 10 points
Based on the testimony of the human resources manager and your knowledge of
human resources management, answer the questions that follow the case study. There
are three questions and you must answer each one. You may answer these questions
on the associated copies.
The function of a human resources manager
Testimony of Franck W. Director of Human Resources
"The position of HR Director (HRD) is strategic and transversal.
It is also a position of influence".
Franck W. graduated from the Institute of Political Studies in Aix-en-Provence and then
obtained a post-graduate degree in Human Resources from the IGS in 1990. Faced
with an economic context that made it difficult for a junior to access an HR position, he
began his career as a trainer in a training organization.
In 1991, he joined Alstom Transport as HR Development Manager. During ten years,
he will evolve within this position on different sites and in particular in Manchester which
will allow him to add an international "cap" to his profile.
Franck W. became HR Director in 2001. In 2006, he was in charge of human resources
at Faiveley, a railway equipment manufacturer, and then became HR Director for three
different companies (Torraspapel, Malmenayde and Condat) from 2008 to 2010. He
now holds this position within the CRT group (Centre de Règlement de Titres, 130
employees), in charge of reimbursing restaurant tickets and service employment
tickets to restaurants, companies and individuals. "In my 20-year professional career,
the first part was devoted to human resources development in a large group. For the
last ten years, I have been a generalist HR manager, operational, in human-sized
structures”.
He manages labor relations independently. In particular, he chairs the Health, Safety
and Working Conditions Committee and assists the Managing Director on the Works
Council. But most of his activity consists of supervising the various projects, whether
recruitment, training, personnel administration, payroll, communication, etc. He has a
team of two people at his side: a Human Resources Officer and a Payroll and
Personnel Administration Manager.
As Human Resources Director (HRD), Franck W. has to face important challenges.
"It's a strategic position because we manage a strategic resource for the company:
human capital. To do this, the Director of Human Resources has a high level of visibility
on internal events, and he is aware of current projects before the other departments of
the company, since he is responsible for evaluating their impact on HR. Moreover, the
HRD is the person best positioned in the company to understand the human element,
to listen to it, to manage it and to orchestrate a certain number of processes and
policies in terms of human resources. For example, within the CRT group, he analyzes
the project of evaluation of managers by their employees "as a logical continuation of
the annual interview process and also as a way to evaluate the significant investmenttraining made in management over the past several years," he explains. But he is first
and foremost a director, obliged to follow his company's strategic guidelines.
Source: Testimony adapted from the APEC's Jobs by Function section
Questions :
1. Describe the main and secondary activities of a Human Resources
Director. What factors can influence the activities related to the HRD
function? (4 points)
Major activities :
Definition of the company's strategy and HR policy:
• Discuss with the general management the general strategy of the company,
take note of the objectives of development of the turnover and the modalities of
envisaged growth ;
• Gather the expectations of the main departments ;
• Monitoring work: observe the evolution of HR strategies of companies of
comparable size or activity, keep abreast of social innovations, etc ;
• Define the company's HR strategy based on the information gathered ;
• Implement this strategy in the various HR areas and set general and specific
objectives by division, department, etc ;
• Represent the management and, if necessary, negotiate with the trade unionist
;
• Communicate with employees and unions on HR projects.
Initiate and support HR projects and supervise teams:
• Set the strategic direction and define HR objectives ;
• Initiate and support major HR projects within the company with other
departments and employees ;
• Recruit employees under his/her responsibility ;
• Manage teams: delegation, evaluation, skills development ;
• Personally manage, if necessary, certain strategic files and negotiations ;
• Make proposals or arbitrate on important choices of service providers:
recruitment firms, communication agencies, etc. ;
Follow-up of projects implemented and evaluation of their results:
• Monitor the evolution of HR projects implemented, compare results with
objectives, implement corrective measures if necessary ;
• Ensure reporting to the General Management ;
• Ensure all or part of the interface with the other departments of the company,
communicate about the evolution of the implemented HR projects ;
Minor activities :
Internal and external communication:
• The HRD may be in charge of the company's internal communication and of
ensuring the communication of HR projects within the company ;
• The HRD may represent the company to the specialized press or other media,
etc. ;
General services:
• The HRD is sometimes responsible for the company's general services.
Management of high potentials :
• The HRD participates in the management of high-potential executives:
implementation of assessments, 360°C, coaching, etc.
Strategic decisions :
• The HRD may be involved in certain strategic decisions such as
mergers/acquisitions, reorganizations.
Variability of activities:
• Depending on the size of the company ;
• Reporting line ;
• Collaboration of the CEO with human resources management.
2. With whom does the Director of Human Resources interact in his or
her daily environment? What is the nature of these relationships and
what expectations do managers have of the HRD? (4 points)
Daily Human Resources Environment:
Reporting relationships:
• CEO or DG ;
• Corporate Secretary ;
• Administrative and Financial Director ;
• …
Functional relationships :
• Administrative and Financial Director ;
• IT Director ;
• Legal Director ;
• Director of Communication ;
• Other operational decisions of the company.
Managers' expectations of HRDs are :
• Help in anticipating changes ;
• A "business minded" orientation ;
• Focus on areas that add value ;
• Promotion and guarantee of rules ;
• Taking into account the various stakeholders ;
• Stimulating reflection ;
• Opposition.
3. In your opinion, what are the knowledge, know-how and social skills
expected of a manager? (2 points)
Knowledge :
• Business school diploma, specializing in Human Resources ;
• Master 2 in Human Resources ;
• Master 2 in business law, labor law ;
• Master 2 in sociology, psychology or social sciences ;
• ...
Know-how :
• General culture ;
• Economic culture ;
• Knowledge of the theory of organizations ;
• Global vision of company functions ;
• Project management ;
• Conflict management ;
• ...
Social Skills :
• Conceptual intelligence ;
• Operational skills ;
• Ability to anticipate ;
• Ability to assess risks ;
• ...
×
When it was created, what was the first mission
of the "Personnel Department"?
a. Hiring 
b. Training
c. Planification
The correct answer is:
Hiring
What does the qualitative aspect of human
resources refer to ?
a. Talent management
b. Collective bonuses
c. Quality of life at work 
The correct answer is:
Quality of life at work
It is not associated with skills :
a. Observable situation
b. Collective recognition
c. Occasional 
The correct answer is:
Occasional
On what balance is the optimal development of
human capital within an organization based ?
a. Social skills/Payroll
b. Knowledge/Workforce
c. Level of skills/Workforce 
The correct answer is:
Level of skills/Workforce
In recruitment, the identification of needs is
essential, the definition of knowledge/knowhow/social skills is at what level:
a. Recruitment decision 
b. Job description
c. Profile description
The correct answer is:
Job description
What are the challenges of compensation and
benefits policy?
a. External compensations/monitoring
payroll/internal fairness

b. External Competitiveness/fair
traitment/monitoring payroll
c. External competitiveness/internal
fairness/workforce
The correct answer is:
External compensations/monitoring payroll/internal
fairness
How can we characterize the approach to
training in the context of a boundaryless
career?
a. Official programs
b. Lifelong training
c. Flexibility 
The correct answer is:
Lifelong training
What characterizes the "high professional" in
the career management grid :
a. Low performance level/High promotion
perspective
b. High performance level/High
promotional perspective

c. High performance level/Low promotion
perspective
The correct answer is:
High performance level/Low promotion
perspective
Which HR activity can be shared with the
manager?
a. Performance appraisal 
b. HR administration at dismissal
c. Phoning
The correct answer is:
Performance appraisal
The following are not associated with skills :
a. Observable in situations
b. Collectively recognized
c. Fixed and invariable 
The correct answer is:
Fixed and invariable
Which of the following factors is related directly
to the success of expatriate assignments?
a. The personality of expatriate
employees

b. The knowledge of the host country's
history
c. The nature of products produced by the
company
The correct answer is:
The personality of expatriate employees
The best medium to reach a large number of
applicants is:
a. Advertising 
b. Employee referrals
c. Employment agencies
The correct answer is: Advertising
The role of organization in career planning is to
introduce and strengthen systems to ensure
__________ of employees.
a. Self-development
b. Economic development
c. Skill development 
The correct answer is:
Skill development
When a company outsources the staff
recruitment, who takes over?
a. Human resources department
b. Team managers 
c. Headhunters
The correct answer is:
Headhunters
In recruitment process, the identification of
needs is essential, on what level does the
definition of knowledge/know-how/social skills
happen during this first step?
a. Recruitment decision 
b. Job description
c. Profile description
The correct answer is:
Job description
__________ can be defined as a written record
of the duties, responsibilities and conditions of
the job.
a. Job description 
b. Job specification
c. Job profile
The correct answer is:
Job description
Which of the following statement is false?
a. Organizations are now less hierarchical in
nature
b. Organizations are now generally focusing
upon domestic rather than international
matters
c. Organizations have adopted more
flexible norms

The correct answer is:
Organizations are now generally focusing upon
domestic rather than international matters
Health insurance, parental leave, company car,
etc., are __________.
a. Base pay
b. Variable pay
c. Benefits 
The correct answer is:
Benefits
During a job interview, what is one of the
essential steps?
a. Relation dimension
b. Integration 
c. Selection
The correct answer is:
Relation dimension
Benefits are considered as:
a. Non-financial compensation 
b. Commissions
c. Bonuses
The correct answer is:
Non-financial compensation
All rights reserved ®
ESSCA 2018 Institut de pédagogie avancée
Guide Moodle étudiants
  

